*irrelevant-explainer-ui.txt*  Row-aligned explanations

REVIEW AND FILE MODES

Diff readers have two modes in the same right-hand pane. File is the aligned
overview/detail described below. Review is independently scrollable, read-only
Markdown for the entire comparison, with visible markers and native wrapping.
It has no anchor rails, source dimming, source-linked cursor or scrolling.
Optional Markdown parsers improve highlighting but are not required.

:IrrelevantExplainer review generates the review and its per-file notes through
sequential annotation, optional reduction and synthesis calls. From an ordinary
source it first opens a HEAD-to-working-tree
Diffview comparison; opening is asynchronous and Cancel/Close can stop it before
inference. From an existing comparison it preserves its revisions and filters.
See |irrelevant-explainer-review| for repository selection and buffer limitations.
:IrrelevantExplainerReview and require("irrelevant_explainer").review() display a review
or its empty/pending/failed/stale state; they never generate one or open Diffview.
Without a supported comparison they report an error. Empty Review directs you
to :IrrelevantExplainer review for generation. A buffer-local
<Plug>(IrrelevantExplainerReview) is available in File, detail, and Review.
No global shortcut is installed. Example display-only shortcut: >
  vim.keymap.set("n", "<leader>aV", "<cmd>IrrelevantExplainerReview<cr>")
<
Review controls: >
  Enter             Follow a host-rendered file reference (not arbitrary prose)
  Esc               Return to the selected File overview
  q                 Close the reader
<
References use the original comparison entries, including renamed, deleted,
binary and empty files, rather than opening guessed working-tree paths.
Diffview navigation/explorer mappings also work in Review, respecting remapped
or disabled bindings. Only an actual selected-file change switches to File;
a no-op next/previous action at a list boundary leaves Review untouched.
Returning to the same narrative restores its reading position. A replacement
narrative starts at the beginning, without stealing focus or switching modes.
Background File updates do not interrupt Review; a fresh File replacement waits
until expanded detail exits. Stale detail is cleared rather than retained.
Winbars identify the mode, request state and Auto, and distinguish background
work from selected-file loading. The editor's statusline remains untouched.
While a review is pending or checking saved results, its body shows the same
faint tint and animated rail as File loading, including before a narrative
exists. These decorations follow
the narrative viewport, not source ranges. Accepted prose and reading position
stay intact; the focused logical cursor line retains a steady rail through its
wraps. Rails cover blank lines and empty space too. Review uses a one-space
continuation prefix so native smoothscroll markers cannot overwrite the gutter.
The loader clears when the request ends or Review is hidden. It indicates
activity, not a percentage.

Opening preflight uses a notification, before a reader is ready. The existing
reader header then shows collection/planning, Annotating 25%, reducing,
synthesizing and Ready. Annotation percentage measures completed planned units,
not files, tokens, elapsed time or overall job completion; 100% is not Ready
until synthesis and final freshness checks pass. A compact bar appears when
space permits. Checkpoints stay internal: the
new narrative and every file's notes install together, never as partial answers.
Older fresh accepted content remains readable during work or ordinary failure.
Narrow headers shorten status while preserving their existing mode/count/Auto
priorities; no new pane or progress layout is introduced.

On failure, :messages identifies the phase/request, completed units and relevant
byte/call limits. Repeat :IrrelevantExplainer review in the comparison/reader to
revalidate and resume matching successful checkpoints. Cancel retains those
checkpoints while the owner stays open; Close, stale/replaced comparisons and
restart discard unfinished work. :IrrelevantExplainerRefresh regenerates Review
phases; in File it stays file/hunk-scoped. A new review from ordinary code opens
a new view rather than adopting another owner's unfinished job. Repeats during
opening only coalesce. Failure starts no automatic per-file fallback.

Completed shared-cache hits show Ready · cached after fresh capture/validation,
without fabricated annotation or synthesis progress, including after outside
opening. Reading or expanding that answer performs no inference. In-memory
navigation restoration still shows Ready · restored and preserves reading state.
Cache clear does not remove displayed valid notes or close readers. See
|irrelevant-explainer-cache| for persistence, privacy, opt-out and Refresh.

The explanation window is read-only and opens at the far right, outside both
old/new diff panes, even when triggered from old. Blank rows preserve
the source's display geometry. Its logical line count matches the whole source,
including unannotated/pending lines. Ordinary j/k, gg/G, counted motions and
cursor movement work beyond the current viewport; either window's cursor line
updates the other without changing focus. Source-driven motion preserves its
column; note-driven motion clamps that column to the destination line.
Native vertical cursor/viewport actions synchronize in both directions, including
zz/zt/zb, z+/z-, searches, marks, screen motions and counted scrolling. The plugin
observes cursor/scroll events and idle view changes instead of remapping each
action. Overview-driven scrolling preserves the requested screen-row placement,
including wrapped segments, rather than resetting the view from the source.
The overview follows whichever old/new source the user moves or scrolls in,
including stacked layouts; it cannot physically align with both stacked panes
at once. Notes-driven motion maps counterpart cursor lines by native comparison
coordinates, not equal old/new line numbers after insertions or deletions.
Wrapping, folds, and diff filler belong to the source; the plugin does not disable
them. Notes-owned virtual rows and folds reproduce that geometry without fake
navigable lines. Long summaries truncate with [+]. Closed folds combine notes
and label them [folded]. Opening/closing folds re-aligns the overview when the
editor becomes idle, even without cursor/scroll movement, following the active
old/new source. Opened cached folds are removed even when their start has scrolled
out of view; accepted anchors and explanations remain unchanged.
Old-side deletion notes render in virtual filler and
are reachable at the following surviving source line, or the last line at EOF.

In the collapsed explanation pane: >
  j / k             Next / previous line, including added/deleted diff sections
  n / p             Next / previous explanation (counts, stops at either end)
  N (Shift-n)       Previous explanation, like p (also in expanded detail)
  K / Enter         Expand full detail and intent basis
  q / Esc           Close the explanation pane
  Ctrl-f/b/d/u/e/y   Scroll the paired source, then repaint the notes
  Mouse wheel       Scroll the paired source
<
In diff mode, both overview and expanded detail inherit Diffview's configured
normal-mode file-navigation and explorer mappings. Defaults: >
  Tab / Shift-Tab   Next / previous diff file
  <leader>e         Focus the file explorer
  <leader>b         Toggle the file explorer
<
Remapped actions, custom RHS/options and disabled bindings are respected.
Irrelevant Explainer's Enter/K controls take precedence on conflicting keys. Other
layout-specific Diffview actions are not attached to the notes buffer.
Switching files exits detail and hides that file's notes, not marking them stale.
Completed file/hunk batches are retained per file/comparison in memory for this
Neovim run. A file with no saved notes shows "No explanations". Returning to an
explained file shows "Checking saved explanations", then "Ready · restored"
after its original context is revalidated. By default, navigation does not infer.
Real context changes instead clear the affected notes and show Stale. Pending
requests remain owned by the comparison when leaving a file; their results are
retained for the original target without replacing another file's reader.
Tab never expands/collapses an explanation, and code mode leaves it unmapped.

With diff.auto_explain=true, an already open diff explanation pane requests a
whole-file explanation when the selected file has no valid saved notes. Valid
saved file/hunk batches are restored without inference; stale saved batches are
re-explained on navigation. The request waits for coherent old/new buffers and
does not steal focus. Opening Diffview alone, code-mode panes, or navigation
after closing the reader does not trigger it. Duplicate events and polling do not
retry a request, nor do current-file edits, cancellation or failures. Background
tab navigation waits until that tab is active. The default is false; opting in
can increase external-agent usage. Refresh or navigate again to retry explicitly.

IrrelevantExplainerToggleAutoExplain switches this mode across all tabs. Enabling
affects subsequent navigation only; disabling leaves started requests and notes
intact. Auto appears beside the count in both overview and expanded diff winbars
whenever the mode is enabled, regardless of request state. It denotes enabled
navigation automation, not a running request. Toggling updates open headers
immediately without collapsing detail, changing focus, or moving reading views.
Counts and Auto take priority over descriptions/hints when the header is narrow.
Disabled mode and code panes omit the indicator. The editor statusline and
vim.b.irrelevant_explainer_status request-state string remain unchanged.

Diff j/k (including counts) switches the followed side when needed to put a
native cursor on added/deleted lines rather than jumping over virtual filler.
Keyboard-driven paired scroll events cannot take over while notes have focus;
direct source motions and mouse-wheel scrolling still drive synchronization.
Status reserves a separate winbar above content as soon as the pane opens,
including initial loading, and never overlays summaries or diff filler.
Source windows without a winbar get a temporary blank matching header to
preserve row alignment. Those placeholders remain through results, refreshes,
terminal states, and detail expansion; they are restored when a source leaves
pane ownership or the pane closes. Existing headers and user edits are preserved.
The status header includes an intent legend: D documented, ~ inferred, ? unknown.
It also shows the number of available explanations, or the current position
when on an explanation (e.g. 2 / 5), in source/display order. Counts update in
both overview and expanded detail, including entry navigation and newly
accepted notes. Shared or folded groups show their positions as a range
(e.g. 1–3 / 5); every explanation counts, not only each navigation stop.
Expanded counts and navigation hints use the same reserved header row.
IrrelevantExplainerTitle defaults to DiagnosticInfo for the information accent
on the Irrelevant Explainer title. IrrelevantExplainerMetadata keeps counts,
spinner, state, separators, descriptions and hints muted regardless of state.
Legend D/~/? symbols reuse IrrelevantExplainerDocumented,
IrrelevantExplainerInferred and IrrelevantExplainerUnknown exactly as item markers
do. User highlight overrides are respected.
Documented means intent cites supplied decision material; inferred means the
model inferred intent from code; unknown means no intent basis was established.
These are intent categories, not guarantees of correctness. Semantic
highlights distinguish summaries, metadata and [+] detail cues. References such
as [old:8–9] or [old:4 ↔ new:4] show original inclusive anchor ranges; vertical
continuation rails mark covered rows and deletion filler. All remain
single-row; Markdown borders/padding cannot shift the source alignment.
Overlapping summaries occupy separate available comparison rows within their
anchor ranges, starting at the preferred annotation position and moving down.
Collisions prefer file overviews, then narrower covered ranges, then
documented/inferred/unknown intent and original result order. Primary positions
are reserved before overlaps are placed. Anchors/source geometry never change.
If no spare row exists inside an anchor, use a free annotation row below it,
adding rows at EOF when needed. Each entry retains its own range and source
target. Closed folds combine notes on a shared compact row.
n/p navigation treats a closed fold as one stop and reveals the first wrapped
segment of its destination. It never wraps: counts clamp to the first/last
explanation, and a motion with no destination leaves the cursor/view unchanged.
Each successful jump centers the destination with native zz,
even when it was already visible, and aligns the overview to that source view.
A line with multiple notes opens their details
together. Navigation and detail never issue another inference request.

Focusing a collapsed explanation uses the same dimming/theme-derived tint as detail.
Its full anchor ranges stay emphasized in the explainer and source buffers;
continuation rails connect them. Moving to a blank row or leaving the explainer
clears collapsed focus. Collapse derives focus from the destination row's summary,
if any, without moving back to retain a highlight. A whole-file overview refers
to all supplied file content, including both available diff sides, but displays
at the file start rather than a changed hunk.
Focusing it emphasizes all content, not only line 1.

K/Enter expands from the selected summary in the same right-hand pane. Visible
entries retain their screen-row position when space allows, range labels and
D/~/? accents; faint preceding overview rows provide context above the expanded
body. K/Enter also expands from summary-free rows anywhere inside original
anchor ranges, including context before a changed-line summary. Visible summaries
take precedence over covering ranges. With no summary, one local note opens
directly even if a file overview covers the same row; an overview alone opens
directly. Multiple local notes offer a chooser with summaries and original
side/range labels, locals first and overviews last, rather than automatically
choosing the shortest range. Cancelling changes no position. Closed summary
folds keep their combined expansion, and opening alone never moves code.
Context and highlighted continuation use real, navigable blank rows with
display-only labels. Neighboring summaries are not parsed or wrapped as Markdown.
Surrounding context and the empty area outside the explanation have a strongly
dimmed backdrop; the expanded body has a subtle theme-derived surface tint.
Summary/range/metadata backgrounds and wrapped prose margins match the card;
code fences remain visible, with syntax colors when their parser is installed.
The tint blends the active
colorscheme's CursorLine background halfway toward Normal, falling back to
NormalFloat or a faint blend of normal text if neither has a background. No
diagnostic color is used. Dark/light themes and custom highlight overrides work.
A continuous ▎ gutter rail marks the entire expanded block, including
wrapped lines and blanks, matching the referenced source rail.
The gutter and its one-space left padding keep the dimmed backdrop, not the
content tint. IrrelevantExplainerDetailGutter customizes foreground/background.
The tint and rail cover at least the visible anchored extent, not just the
explanation text. Anchored context above a changed-line summary joins the block;
short details get highlighted continuation rows down to the referenced range's
end. Neighboring summaries inside those anchors retain dimmed text without
interrupting the active background or gutter rail. Whole-file overviews cover
the full visible file extent, even across later entries.
Extent follows displayed wraps, folds and diff filler. Long detail remains fully
highlighted rather than clipped to the anchor's height; continuation is bounded
to the visible source viewport and recomputed on entry navigation.
Markdown and intent foreground colors remain unchanged. Collapse restores the
original gutter/highlight settings. Themes can customize
IrrelevantExplainerDetailContext, IrrelevantExplainerDetailBackdrop and
IrrelevantExplainerDetailActive;
the rail uses IrrelevantExplainerActiveRange.
Near the bottom, leading context is trimmed to show the first explanation line
without moving code.
The [+] control becomes [−]. Detail shows the explanation and intent basis,
without context warnings or separate evidence/anchor lists. Range labels and
source gutter markers still identify the referenced lines. No popup covers code.

The cursor can move through the entire expanded pane, including highlighted
blank rows and surrounding notes. Moving onto context outside the current
anchored range automatically collapses detail at that destination, not back at
the summary. Cursor motion inside anchored context keeps detail open and updates
the corresponding source cursor, resolving folded rows and old/new diff filler.
All prose remains navigable even if it is taller than its anchor. Ordinary
movement onto another note does not auto-expand it: use K/Enter explicitly, or
n/p/N to browse while keeping details open. Source-driven scrolling does not
auto-collapse the reading view.

In detail, K/Enter or Esc/q explicitly collapses at the current source-aligned
position, never forcing a return to the summary or invocation row. Source-backed
continuation retains its exact position; prose resolves by current visual-row
geometry bounded to visible anchors, with nearest-target and earlier-row tie
rules. If no anchored target remains visible, collapse keeps the current native
source position. Without reading motion after opening or n/p initialization, it
also keeps the source position rather than remapping the newly placed header.
Source viewports and explanation focus remain unchanged within native geometry
limits; removing prose can change layout, but does not select a summary for you.
Enter/K in detail never opens the ambiguity chooser.
n/p browses entries in source order (counts, stopping at either end), moving the source
cursor and viewport to the selected note and synchronizing its diff counterpart.
The destination is centered with native zz before expanding its detail; further
movement/scrolling updates the current position retained on collapse.
Native file-edge limits and detail space still apply.
Deleted rows use the old source when the new side has only virtual filler.
Entry navigation updates the existing Markdown buffer in place; it does not
switch through the overview or retrigger buffer/filetype attachment events.
Statusline plugins retain the same buffer throughout expanded navigation.
Entries expand at their current overview position when space allows.
Code-driven scrolling follows the summary's natural position until the card
reaches an edge, then pins it within the content viewport below the header.
A fitting card stays entirely visible at either edge. Scrolling back releases
it into natural alignment. A longer card retains a viewport-sized reading area
and the logical prose position, including later wrapped segments; every paragraph
remains reachable. Pinning neither scrolls code again nor changes selection or
focus, even when every anchor leaves the screen. Bounds use the card's height,
not its blank anchored continuation. Dimmed neighbors remain navigable where
space permits. Resize, wrapping, folds and diff geometry recompute placement
without replacing the Markdown buffer or resetting reading.
Normal-mode j/k in expanded detail move by displayed row, including counts: 4j
moves four screen rows, not four buffer lines. The buffer-local mappings bypass
global j/k remappings. Native gj/gk, other motions, and overview/source mappings
remain unchanged.
Ctrl-e/Ctrl-y still accept counts. In overview, code and notes scroll together;
with detail open, source scrolling uses sticky placement instead of equal prose
movement. Explanation-driven scrolling continues to move code while pinned.
At the reader's upper buffer limit, Ctrl-y scrolls code upward even with no
earlier prose rows. k on the summary's first displayed segment at the top screen
edge likewise scrolls code without collapsing into stale context. Later summary
segments use ordinary gk movement, even when clipped to the top edge.
Counts for the top-edge shortcut use native source display rows;
both controls stop at the source's beginning. Other prose/context motion remains
ordinary cursor movement.
Wraps, folds, diff filler and source scrolloff (including unequal diff margins)
are accounted for without extra cursor-margin scrolls. Original source options
and scroll/cursor bindings are retained.
Native expanded-detail viewport changes (including zz/zt/zb and cursor motions
that scroll) move sources by the actual display-row distance, bounded by
each buffer's native limits. The detail cursor remains free to read paragraphs;
Markdown cursor lines are never treated as code line numbers. After a reading
scroll, the source cursor selects the final source-aligned target, even if
sticky-edge scrolling left the reader cursor unchanged. Context and continuation
retain exact source coordinates; prose selects by its final content-screen row,
bounded to visible anchors with nearest-target and earlier-row tie rules.
Without a visible prose target, the native source cursor remains unchanged.
Selection preserves the completed source viewport, focus and original scrolloff
settings. Source-driven motion, initialization and layout-only changes never
apply an inactive prose cursor to code, and a true scroll no-op does not reselect.
Referenced source ranges are
temporarily marked with muted ▎ signs in the gutter. Text outside the union of
the expanded anchors is dimmed in the source buffers, including both diff sides.
A side with no anchors is dimmed entirely. Anchored syntax, Git diff backgrounds
and existing signs are preserved; only outside text foregrounds change.
Native diff foregrounds take precedence over dimming, so changed text outside
the anchors can remain brighter to preserve Git cues.
IrrelevantExplainerSourceContext customizes that foreground. Focus/markings follow
entry navigation and the collapsed destination row's summary, if any. They
disappear on blank collapsed rows, stale data or pane closure, and when collapsed
focus leaves the explanation.
The IrrelevantExplainerActiveRange foreground can be customized by your theme.
Markers respect the source's 'signcolumn' setting; priority 5 gives Git and
diagnostic signs precedence when space is limited. Use 'signcolumn' "auto:2"
to allow another sign alongside them. The plugin does not change this setting.
Overview and detail use filetype 'irrelevant_explainer', registered with the Markdown
Tree-sitter parser. Optional markdown/markdown_inline parsers highlight structure
and inline code; installed language parsers highlight fenced snippets. Markdown
markers remain visible with window-local 'conceallevel' zero. Detail wraps
natively without renderer borders or padding. Missing parsers retain readable
semantic styling; the plugin never installs parsers or invokes render-markdown.nvim.
User renderer setup and ordinary Markdown buffers are unchanged. Explicit user
integrations targeting 'irrelevant_explainer' remain under the user's control.
Prompts request Markdown detail, including
backtick inline code and language-tagged fenced snippets; summaries stay compact
single-line plain text. The response itself remains JSON, not a Markdown document.
Detail is already part of the returned answer:
opening it does not invoke AI. Initial expansion keeps the source position;
navigating or paired scrolling then follows the user's actions.

Pending, stale, and failed status uses the persistent matched winbar, not content
rows or the editor's statusline. Global statuslines/lualine retain ownership.
Every active and queued range has a steady faint full-width loading tint.
Only a cursor-width ▊ gutter rail animates: an eased 2.4-second cascading
glow, updated every 100ms. Braille spinners remain as activity cues. Rails cover
wrapped/folded ranges and deletion/EOF filler; accepted text and backgrounds
stay steady, and source/diff buffers are never decorated by the loader.
While notes have focus, the cursor's logical row keeps a steady rail. Other
requested rows and the header spinner keep animating, including saved-result
checks and expanded detail; the paused rail resumes when the cursor or focus
moves. Saved File checks load the visible extent without an inference request.
Your cursor shape/blink settings are never changed. The palette derives from Normal and
DiagnosticInfo; themes can customize IrrelevantExplainerLoading (steady background) and
IrrelevantExplainerLoadingRail1–8 (gutter brightness, dimmest through brightest).
Before diff collection completes, file requests cover the whole source and hunk requests
use a provisional cursor/native changed region. Collected anchors then replace
that preview. Ticks update visible decorations, not buffer text or full-file
coordinate scans. Earlier accepted notes remain visible during an addition;
cancel/failure preserves them, while stale data removes them.
Focused-context status identifies the effective nearby-line radius and omitted
file count in the overview, not the detailed explanation. Status stays above
content even in a narrow pane. The explanation count comes first; the title is
omitted when necessary and verbose status/context text is shortened to keep
counts visible. Visible text keeps its semantic colors. The legend abbreviates as
space requires, first documented to doc, then just D and ? around ~ inferred.
vim.b.irrelevant_explainer_status exposes pane state for optional statusline components.
The explanation window never joins diff/scrollbind membership. Closing the
source closes its owned annotation/detail windows and handlers.

vim:tw=78:ts=8:ft=help:norl:
